---
title: "Neutral theory for competing attention in social networks"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-05-08-PRR
excerpt: ''
date: 2020-10-05
venue: 'Physical Review Research'
paperurl: 'https://journals.aps.org/prresearch/pdf/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.013070'
citation: 'Plata, C.A., Pigani, E., Azaele, S., Calleja-Solanas, V., Palazzi, M.J., Solé-Ribalta, A., Borge-Holthoefer, J., Meloni, S. and Suweis, S., 2021. Neutral theory for competing attention in social networks. Physical Review Research, 3(1), p.013070.'
---

## Abstract
Inspired by the neutral theory of ecology, we provide an analytical formalism capable of capturing the competition for attention in online social systems and explaining several emergent patterns observed in the context of information ecosystems. Specifically, besides meme popularity distributions, we study the persistence distributions of memes within the network and the capacity of the system to sustain several coexisting diverse memes. Such properties have a clear analogy to extinction time and biodiversity in natural ecosystems. In the social network context, diversity of ideas is indeed an identifying characteristic of the “health” of the communication process. We show how our theoretical framework is successful in explaining real data collected from the Twitter online social network. The proposed framework introduced here provides both insight into the roles played by competition and network structure on meme diversity and persistence, and an applicable null model to be tested against real data.


---
title: "Digital proximity tracing on empirical contact networks for pandemic control"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-05-08-PRR
excerpt: ''
date: 2021-03-12
venue: 'Nature Communications'
paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-21809-w'
citation: 'Cencetti, G., Santin, G., Longa, A., Pigani, E., Barrat, A., Cattuto, C., Lehmann, S., Salathe, M. and Lepri, B., 2021. Digital proximity tracing on empirical contact networks for pandemic control. Nature communications, 12(1), pp.1-12.'
---

## Abstract
Digital contact tracing is a relevant tool to control infectious disease outbreaks, including the COVID-19 epidemic. Early work evaluating digital contact tracing omitted important features and heterogeneities of real-world contact patterns influencing contagion dynamics. We fill this gap with a modeling framework informed by empirical high-resolution contact data to analyze the impact of digital contact tracing in the COVID-19 pandemic. We investigate how well contact tracing apps, coupled with the quarantine of identified contacts, can mitigate the spread in real environments. We find that restrictive policies are more effective in containing the epidemic but come at the cost of unnecessary large-scale quarantines. Policy evaluation through their efficiency and cost results in optimized solutions which only consider contacts longer than 15–20 minutes and closer than 2–3 meters to be at risk.
